# 4.1 Applications of Sorting
#ADS #Medium  #Sorting
2024-08-19 : 11:46

recap zone:
```
In previous chapter of the book, we discussed different data structures, their types and their properties. Up to this moment we know that there are two main data structure types out there: contiguous and linked, we know that some of them may have a "tree-like shape", while others "chain shape".
What is really cool about data structures is the divercity in properties and applications.
```

---

Sorting is a building block for many algorithms and one of the most well-studied problems in Computer Science and there are many different algorithms.

There are many applications of sorting out there, but here's a list of the most interesting ones with pseudocode:

- Binary Search preprocessing.
Binary search works only for **sorted** inputs, meaning we have to preprocess input array if it's not sorted explicitly.
- Closest pair
Problem of finding the pair with the smallest difference is easy linear problem if our input array is preprocessed and sorted:

```python
array = sorted(array)

min_dif = float("inf")
closest_pair = ()
for l in range(len(arr)-1):
	r = l + 1
	dif = abs(arr[r] - arr[l])
	if dif < min_dif:
		min_dif = dif
		closest_pair = (arr[l], arr[r])

print(min_dif)
```

- Contains duplicate?
This problem can be considered to be a special case of closest pair, because we search for the pair of values with difference of zero.
```python
array = sorted(array)

for l in range(len(arr)-1):
	r = l + 1
	dif = abs(arr[r] - arr[l])
	if dif == 0:
		print(True)
		break
	
print(min_dif)
```

- Mode of an array

In this problem we can sort our array, so all duplicates will be grouped, then we can go through these groups to find the mode.

```python
arr = sorted(array)

max_counts = 0
mode = arr[0]
l = 0
while l < len(arr)-1:
	r = l + 1
	cur_counter = 0
	while arr[r] == arr[l]:
		cur_counter += 1
		r += 1
	if cur_counter > max_counts:
		max_counts = cur_counter
		mode = arr[l]
	l = r + 1

print(mode)
```

- $k_{th}$ largest item
If we have no duplicates in our array we can find $k_{th}$ largest element in constant time $O(1)$, because it must sit in the $k_{th}$ position.

```python
array = sorted(array, ascending=False)
kth_largest = array[k]
```

#### Stop and Think:
Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether two sets (of size m and n, respectively) are disjoint. Analyze the worst case complexity in items of m and n, considering the case where $m \lt\lt n$

Hmm...
I think we can sort a small set of size $m$ because it's cheaper for us, and go through all elements in big set of size $n$, searching them in small sorted set.

```python
def disjoint(m_set, n_set)
	m_set = sorted(m_set)
	for n in n_set:
		if search(m_set, n):
			return True
	return False
```
Worst time complexity, assuming we use Binary Search and Quick sort:

$$O(mlog_m + nlog_m)$$
because Qsort for m set takes $O(mlog_m)$, linear loop through elements of n is $O(n)$ and binary search is $O(log_m)$
Ez Pez,

Okay, that's it for today!
Today I have to repair my TV, so it's less code with notes today.
Anyway, See Ya!

21.08.2024
Okay, back on track! I have repaired my TV)

## 4.2 Pragmatics of Sorting
Before implementing sorting algorithm it's a good idea to pause and ponder the following questions:
- Ascending or Descending?
- Key field?
- How should we handle equal keys?
- What about non-numerical data?
